I hate the gospel that says those who have the first fruits of the Spirit don't have to have grown inwardly, waiting, waiting, waiting for their adoption, the redemption of their bodies.
I believe in suffering.
I believe it's our destiny.
I believe it's our gift.
I believe it's our missionary strategy.
I believe God rules over it and uses it for our good only.
One of the things Piper says here is that suffering isn't just something God permits.
It's something he rules over, uses, and even gives.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper presses into the surprising and sometimes unsettling strategy of suffering in God's global mission.
His message was originally delivered in Wheaton, Illinois at the Act III Reformation Conference on October 30, 1999.
I want to talk about suffering.
And I talk about suffering and I think about suffering a lot these days.
As a demonstration of the excellency of these things, his love and his power
and getting the Great Commission done, which is also about the excellency of God among the nations where it's not esteemed.
It's not going to get done without suffering.
You won't magnify the power of God, you won't magnify the love of God, and you won't get the Great Commission done without suffering.
It won't happen.
Suffering is appointed as our normal lot in this age and as the specific strategy for finishing the Great Commission.
Let me just give the tip of the iceberg.
Psalm 34, 19, many are the afflictions of the righteous.
The Lord delivers them out of them all.
Luke 10, 3, behold, I send you out as Lamb.
In the midst of wolves, only one thing happens when lambs go into the midst of wolves.
They get torn to shreds.
It's not a joke.
Lambs only get eaten by wolves.
Jesus was eaten by wolves at Calvary.
So join him on the Calvary Road.
If you don't take up your cross and follow him, you're not his disciple.
I send you out as lambs in the midst of wolves.
Matthew 24-9, they will deliver you to tribulation.
They will kill you.
You will be hated by all nations for my namesake.
So go and make disciples.
Acts 14-22, this is basic discipleship.
Paul finishes the first missionary journey.
He comes back and what does he tell every church?
Every church.
Through many tribulations, we must enter the kingdom.
That was basic
Christian discipleship through many tribulations.
We must enter the kingdom.
There is no other way to enter the kingdom except through many tribulations.
You say that on your second discipling.
You got a six-point or a ten-point or a twelve-point discipling program suffering better be one or two or three.
Because it will take him off guard quickly if it's not.
1 Thessalonians chapter 3 verse 3.
We sent Timothy our brother and fellow worker
to strengthen and encourage you in your faith so that no one would be disturbed by the afflictions.
For you yourselves know that we have been destined for this.
Don't be disturbed by your afflictions.
You're appointed for them, destined for them, set for them.
1 Peter 412, beloved, don't be surprised at the fiery ordeal coming upon you as though something strange were happening.
This is normal.
America is abnormal.
Beware of living here.
It's the most dangerous place to bring up kids.
It's the most dangerous place in the world to live today, except maybe France, Germany,
or other more comfortable countries.
2 Timothy 3, 12, all who desire to live a godly life will be persecuted.
That doesn't work in your life.
Here's probably the reason.
We have so domesticated godliness, it is unintelligible in the church.
What is godliness to you?
Don't go to movies, don't dance, don't smoke, stay married.
I'll tell you, nobody is going to persecute you for those things.
That must not be what, that's not godliness.
Godliness is radical godworthiness and god-centeredness and god-drivenness and god-satisfaction that liberates you to do crazy things for which you will get persecuted.
And if you're not godly, you won't get persecuted.
There is a radical and a normal way to be a Christian.
It's all over the New Testament.
We don't live it by and large in America.
We are so saturated with this culture of ease and comfort and escape and retirement and leisure and entertainment that New Testament Christianity is unintelligible by and large.
And I don't just mean persecution when I talk about suffering.
I mean sickness as well.
That's a point into us.
2 Corinthians 4, 16, don't lose heart.
We don't lose heart.
For though our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewed day by day.
What is this outer nature wasting away?
What's that?
It's wrinkles, it's glasses, it's arthritis, it's hip replacements, it's cancer, it's everything that comes with being
fallen redeemed creature.
I say redeemed because Romans 8, 23 stresses that.
Paul was fighting all the time against over-realized eschatology.
We've already become kings.
David touched on that in the first hour.
The self-assessment of these Corinthians was out of this world, literally.
And he had to bring him back over and over again into the fallen world where they have to live out their fallenness.
You have to live out your fallenness.
You will die.
We get saved in stages, forgiveness of sins, peace with God now, but the lifting of the curse comes in stages.
You're going to die, and you're going to get old, and your eyes are going to go bad, and your hearing is going to go bad, and your memory is going to go bad, and some of you are going to get Alzheimer's, and some of you are going to, like a woman that I was told about as I was preaching a little teeny fellowship the other day who had such horrible arthritis, she was locked into a
a wheelchair and could only move her eyes and one little finger that she could just make her chair go like this.
And the point of telling me about it is that she was the happiest person this woman had ever seen.
Here's what Romans 823 says.
We ourselves, we ourselves who have the first fruits of the Holy Spirit, grown inwardly, waiting for our adoption.
the redemption of our bodies.
To hell with health, wealth, and prosperity gospel.
I tell you, I deal with it day in and day out with people who've been set with a couple in my office.
And was it?
It was just a few days ago.
I lose track of time.
Who've been now on a descending spiral from Charismania
to assemblies of God, which is not Charismania by and large, I do not believe, but still having some emphases that in their experience to longing for the Word.
This is a couple.
This is so interesting.
I'll just give you a little background here just because it's so interesting.
This is a couple that joined my church in 19
ninety six years ago, whatever that is, and left within three months.
I hadn't seen hardener hair of them.
They were through their membership.
I didn't know where they went.
I called them.
He recounted to me the conversation.
They left because they had been persuaded that to come to my church was a sellout to all that God could be for them.
And so they went to a big charismatic church in the suburbs.
Don't give you the name.
But I'll tell you, they do not believe in sickness.
They do not believe in sickness.
They don't believe that any Christian has to be sick or poor.
And for four years they were there.
Then they began to hear
things that were so unbiblical, so disturbing.
God was giving them ears to hear.
And every day, they became more and more uneasy as the Word became more and more paramount in their lives.
And they had to bail out.
And the people that had lured them out of the church up there were very disturbed about this.
And yet they didn't want to go back to, oh, it's the worst thing you could
even our, you know, Calvacostal kind of Baptist.
So they went, they went to an assembly of Godchurch.
I know this, I know this church.
I could worship at this church.
The theology I couldn't handle, but it's not crazy and it's pretty level headed.
And, um, and they've been there for two years now.
And they came to see me and with tears rolling down their face, they said,
We didn't know where else to turn in the cities.
Now there are other places they could have turned, but their experience is small.
We didn't know where else to turn to just find somebody who could tell us what the Bible says.
Would you please help us get our bearings?
We just feel like we don't know where to turn because we're hearing things and we're not sure.
And they just gushed over the things they've gotten in the few months.
They had gone to the church before they joined for two years.
And I said, would you tell me how you got saved?
And he said, Easter, 1993.
You didn't know anything about this.
But Easter, 1993.
And then he recounted my sermon to him and how God, like that.
And it took him about eight months before he went flat on his face and gave it all up.
He was talking crack cocaine.
We're talking sleeping around.
We're talking, so I didn't know this.
I didn't know this had happened.
I didn't know any of this.
I hate the gospel that says those who have the first fruits of the Spirit don't have to have grown inwardly, waiting, waiting, waiting for their adoption, the redemption of their bodies.
I believe in suffering.
I believe it's our destiny.
I believe it's our gift.
I believe it's our missionary strategy.
And I believe God rules over it and uses it for our good only as we are His children.
I've got an article here.
This is one of the most mind-boggling articles I've read in years.
The date is September 16, 1996 Christianity Today, written by Stephen St., the son of Nate St.,
met God in this vicinity and went and got himself killed in Ecuador loving people.
Now, Elizabeth Elliot has told that story and Elizabeth Elliot tells it right.
And she's devoted her life to talking about suffering and sacrifice and duty.
She has a little problem with me and my Christian hedonism.
I love her to death.
and we've done seminars together and poke each other and I try to get her to be happy in Jesus and she tries to get me to obey Jesus.
Well she is happy and I try to obey.
This article is just like that.
He's just like her and I've been trying to track this guy down
And I did, I put, I don't know if Rick and Aaron are still here, I don't know if Rick did it, but I said to my assistant, get in touch with this guy, read the sentence to him, and ask him if he meant it, or if it was a misprint.
And they did.
They called and said, he read the sentence to him, and said, my pastor John Piper wants to know, do you mean this?
Because he's going to quote you all over the country, if you mean this.
And he said, I'm in.
So I'll just read the sentence to you.
He's the son now, the man who has speared to death,
in Ecuador.
This is the son writing this article.
He's been down there, he's ministering these people and he has done research to find out what were the dynamics on that morning when these people killed these people.
And he's found out intrigued in the tribe that has to do with a couple that was running away to get married inappropriately and some anger that was happening and it was
The spheres were not against Jesus.
This was a fortuitous thing here, owing to a lot of dynamics in the tribe and some eloping couple.
And he's writing all about this in this article.
You can get it on the web.
I'll give you the date again so you can go find it.
September 16, 1996, did they have to die?
Steve's saying, here is his conclusion.
As they describe their recollections,
It occurred to me how incredibly unlikely it was that the Palm Beach killing took place at all.
It is an anomaly that I cannot explain outside of divine intervention.
I can't account for why they die.
apart from divine intervention.
It takes your breath away.
You know, if you were the guy's son, you say, don't talk about my father like that.
Don't say God killed my father.
But it's the son who wrote the article.
Divine intervention is the only way to account, he said.
for what happened on Palm Beach.
Well, you read 1 Peter, those who suffer according to the will of God and trust their souls to a faithful Creator.
Don't think something strange is happening to you.
Judgment begins with the household of God.
Who's judgment?
Now here we are in America.
Look at this building.
Here we are in America, 911, health insurance, doctors everywhere, clothes, heating systems and sewer systems, fresh water, refrigeration, germ touch me, I get mad quick.
Dr. Can't fix me, he's bad doctor.
Oh, our expectation.
So I have another article here.
This is all leading into a couple of texts, but this is about George Will.
And it really, this is very recent.
This is September 29 this year in our newspaper at home.
And it's about the surge of wealth this year in America.
You've been watching this dark market.
You've been watching what's happening in America this year.
Listen to this.
In the first half of 1999, January through June, the increase, not total, the increase in net worth of American households was approximately equal to the total
annual income of 2.5 billion people in China, India, Russia, and Brazil.
American families from January to June upped their worth to a degree equaling the total worth of all the people in China, all the people in India,
all the people in Russia and all the people in Brazil.
Now, what's the point in saying that?
This quote, in contemporary America, pleasures quickly come to be considered entitlements.
The market, this is the sentence that I think most concerned me about my topic this morning.
the market and the American pain threshold move inversely.
So imagine the political furies that will be let loose when the market plunge pulses fear through the ganglions of society of stockholders.
Now just take the phrase, the market
and the American pain threshold move inversely.
I want to make sure you understand that.
That's complicated language.
George Will is not a seeker-sensitive writer.
So you have to work at this.
Prosperity and market are going up.
Inversely, our pain threshold is going down.
Now, do you know what a threshold is?
It's the
point at which your pain is unbearable.
That's going down as your prosperity is going up.
The more wealthy you are, the more quickly you are disaffected with any amount of pain or insecurity or in other words, our country is
wired to unfit you to be a Christian.
Or especially it is wired, the prosperity of America has built into it a psychological dynamic to keep us from finishing the Great Commission.
We can talk all we want about
the amount of money there is here that can go to the Great Commission, which it ought to go for.
It's very clear from Psalm 67 why we have a lot of money.
God has blessed you so that all the ends of the earth might fear His name, Psalm 67-7.
It is crystal clear why we have money.
You have money so that the Great Commission can be finished, not so that you can have a thick retirement pad.
We know why we have money.
The Bible tells us very plainly why we have money, but having money has built into it a counter effect.
Namely, it lowers our pain threshold so that we surround ourselves with more and more protections against pain.
They cost lots of money, more and more insurance and more and more retirement plans and more and more safe neighborhoods and more and more moving away from the hard things of the world and more and more into ease.
And more and more leisure and more and more pills, we are a Prozac culture.
Don't feel yourself unduly attacked if you're on it this morning, because I do have a place in my medicinalology for fallen people to go to doctors and to use aspirin, AS, and even get help with physical dimensions of depression.
However,
We overdo it.
Big time.
Will says America has an entertainment economy.
Michael Wolf, a media and entertainment specialist at Booze Allen in Hamilton, says the entertainment share of the GDP is well over $1 trillion.
And he closes this editorial with a remarkable poem.
A quote from the poem by Thomas Hardy called the convergence of tween lines on the loss of the Titanic, and poem ends like this.
And as the smart ship grew in stature, grace, and hue, in shadowy, silent distance grew the iceberg too.
Alien, they seem to be,
No mortal eye could see the ultimate welding of their later history.
Comment.
Are there icebergs in America's path?
None just now.
None that is than any mortal eye can see.
George Wilk.
But here's my goal.
I want you to suffer.
I want you to embrace suffering.
I want you to choose suffering.
There are martyrs appointed to finish the Great Commission, Revelation 6, 11.
Do you remember, under the throne, the martyrs?
Hello, Lord, how long until you vindicate our blood?
The Lord says, clothing them with a white robe, you still be quiet until the full number of your brothers who are appointed to die is in.
There's a number of martyrs appointed for the finishing of the consummation of this age and some are in this room.
And I want to strengthen your hands.
And some of you are running with all your might away from that possibility.
I want to reverse your course where you live and how you choose.
I want to reverse your course this morning.
And I want to do it for Christ's sake.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper continues our eight-part series, Living and Dying for the Glory of Christ, with a message titled, To Die is Game, How Suffering Magnifies Christ.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit desiringgod.org.